Look at all the many others, and there may be some who are in
greater pain. It’s like being put into a fiery furnace to be refined.”
The Dalai Lama jumped in to affirm the truth of what the Archbishop
was saying. “Too much self-centered thinking is the source of suffering.
A compassionate concern for others’ well-being is the source of
happiness. I do not have as much experience with physical pain as you
have. Yet one day I was in Bodh Gaya, the place where the Buddha
achieved enlightenment, to begin a series of important Buddhist
teachings. Bodh Gaya is the holiest pilgrimage place for Buddhists.
“There were around one hundred thousand people who had come to
attend the teachings, but suddenly I had intense pain in my abdomen.
They did not know then that it was my gallbladder, but I was told I
needed to go to the hospital urgently. When bouts of pain struck, it was so
intense that I was sweating. We had to drive to the hospital in Patna, the
capital city of the state of Bihar, which was two hours away. As we were
driving, along the road we passed a lot of poverty. Bihar is one of the
poorest states in India. I could see out the window that the children had
no shoes, and I knew that they were not getting a proper education. Then
as we approached Patna, under a hut I saw an old man lying on the
ground. His hair was disheveled, his clothes were dirty, and he looked
sick. He had no one to take care of him. Really, he looked as if he were
dying. All the way to the hospital, I was thinking of this man and felt his
suffering, and I completely forgot about my own pain. By simply shifting
my focus to another person, which is what compassion does, my own pain
was much less intense. This is how compassion works even at the
physical level.
“So as you rightly mentioned, a self-centered attitude is the source of
the problem. We have to take care of ourselves without selfishly taking
care of ourselves. If we don’t take care of ourselves, we cannot survive.
We need to do that. We should have wise selfishness rather than foolish
selfishness. Foolish selfishness means you just think only of yourself,
don’t care about others, bully others, exploit others. In fact, taking care of
others, helping others, ultimately is the way to discover your own joy and
to have a happy life. So that is what I call wise selfishness.”

T
“You are wise,

” the Archbishop said. “I wouldn’t just say wise selfish.

You are wise.”

• • •

he Buddhist practice of mind training, called lojong in Tibetan, is an
important part of the Dalai Lama’s tradition. One of the fundamental
messages in the original twelfth-century lojong text echoes what the
Dalai Lama and the Archbishop were saying about looking away from

oneself: “All dharma teachings agree on one point—lessening one’s self-
absorption.”

The text clarifies that when we focus on our ourselves we are destined
to be unhappy: “Contemplate that, as long as you are too focused on your
self-importance and too caught up in thinking about how you are good or
bad, you will experience suffering. Obsessing about getting what you
want and avoiding what you don’t want does not result in happiness.” The
text includes the admonition: “Always maintain only a joyful mind.”
So what, then, is this joyful mind? Jinpa, who wrote a translation and
commentary on this revered text, explained as we were preparing for the
trip that joy is our essential nature, something everyone can realize. We
could say that our desire for happiness is, in a way, an attempt to
rediscover our original state of mind.
It seems that Buddhists believe that joy is the natural state but that the
ability to experience joy can also be cultivated as a skill. As we were
hearing, so much depends on where we put our attention: on our own
suffering or that of others, on our own perceived separation or on our
indivisible connection.
Our ability to cultivate joy has not been scientifically studied as
thoroughly as our ability to cultivate happiness. In 1978, psychologists
Philip Brickman, Dan Coates, and Ronnie Janoff-Bulman published a
landmark study that found that lottery winners were not significantly
happier than those who had been paralyzed in an accident. From this and
subsequent work came the idea that people have a “set point” that
determines their happiness over the course of their life. In other words,

we get accustomed to any new situation and inevitably return to our
general state of happiness.
However, more recent research by psychologist Sonja Lyubomirsky
suggests that perhaps only 50 percent of our happiness is determined by
immutable factors like our genes or temperament, our “set point.” The
other half is determined by a combination of our circumstances, over
which we may have limited control, and our attitudes and actions, over
which we have a great deal of control. According to Lyubomirsky, the
three factors that seem to have the greatest influence on increasing our
happiness are our ability to reframe our situation more positively, our
ability to experience gratitude, and our choice to be kind and generous.
These were exactly the attitudes and actions that the Dalai Lama and the
Archbishop had already mentioned and to which they would return as
central pillars of joy.

M

Have You Renounced Pleasure?

ost religions have a strong conviction that we cannot discover
lasting happiness through our senses. So while temporary

enjoyment can come through our senses, it is inevitably fleeting and not
the source of enduring satisfaction. There is a Buddhist saying that trying
to seek happiness through sensory gratification is like trying to quench
your thirst by drinking saltwater. But what exactly is the relationship
between joy and pleasure and between what the Dalai Lama has called
happiness at the physical level and happiness at the mental level?
“Your Holiness, many believe that as a monk you have renounced
pleasure or enjoyment.”
“And sex,

” the Dalai Lama added, although that was not exactly where

I was going.
“What?” the Archbishop said.
“Sex, sex,” the Dalai Lama repeated.
“Did you just say that?” the Archbishop said incredulously.
“Oh, oh,

” the Dalai Lama said with a laugh, noticing the Archbishop’s

surprise, and then reached over to reassure him, which caused the
Archbishop to erupt in a gleeful cackle.
“So aside from sex,

” I said, trying to bring us back,

“have you
renounced pleasure and enjoyment? I sat next to you at lunch, and it
looked like you were really enjoying the wonderful food. What is the role
for you of enjoying the pleasures of life?”
“I love food. Without food, my body can’t survive. You also,

” he said,

turning to the Archbishop,

“can’t just think God, God, God. I cannot just
think about compassion, compassion, compassion. Compassion will not
fill my stomach. But, you see, each meal we have to develop the ability to
consume the meal without attachment.”
“Huh?” the Archbishop asked, not quite following how the Dalai
Lama was using the Buddhist term attachment, and perhaps also not quite

following how anyone could not be attached to one’s food.
“Not eating out of greed,

” the Dalai Lama explained. “Eating only for

the survival of the body. One must think about the deeper value of
nourishing the body.”
At one of our meals the Dalai Lama had showed me his bowl of
Tibetan rice and yogurt pudding and said,

“This is typical Tibetan monk’s

food—I love this.” He was eating with relish. There was something
deeply relieving about knowing that holiness didn’t require a rejection of
the simple joys of life, like a good meal and especially pudding.
I felt pretty sure that he had gotten some significant amount of
pleasure out of eating that dessert. He was clearly experiencing some joy
through his senses. I wondered about the boundary between enjoyment
and greed. Was it the second or third helping, and therefore a matter of
portion size, or was it a matter of attitude toward each bite? Jinpa shared
with me a well-known Tibetan Buddhist prayer that often is said before a
meal: “Viewing this meal as a medicine, I shall enjoy it without greed or
anger, not out of gluttony nor out of pride, not to fatten myself, but only
to nourish my body.” Perhaps the Dalai Lama was saying that eating to
nourish the body did not require one to deny the enjoyment and
satisfaction of the experience.
“So now to your question,

” the Dalai Lama said. “When we speak of
experiencing happiness, we need to know that there are actually two
different kinds. The first is the enjoyment of pleasure through our senses.
Here, sex, the example I cited, is one such experience. But we can also
experience happiness at the deeper level through our mind, such as
through love, compassion, and generosity. What characterizes happiness
at this deeper level is the sense of fulfillment that you experience. While
the joy of the senses is brief, the joy at this deeper level is much longer
lasting. It is true joy.
“A believer develops this deeper level of joy through faith in God,
which brings inner strength, inner peace. For a nonbeliever or a nontheist
like me, we must develop this deeper level of joy through training the
mind. This kind of joy or happiness comes from within. Then the
pleasures of the senses become less important.

“Over the last several years, I have discussed with scientists this
distinction between the sensory level of pleasure and pain and the deeper
level of mental happiness and suffering. Now if we look at today’s
materialistic life people seem mainly concerned with sensory
experiences. So that’s why their satisfaction is very limited and brief,
since their experience of happiness is so dependent on external stimuli.
For example, so long as the music is playing, they feel happy.” He tilted
his head to the side with a smile as if appreciating the music. “When
something good is happening, they are happy. Good food, they are happy.
When these things stop, then they feel bored, restless, and unhappy. Of
course this is nothing new. Even in the time of the Buddha, people would
fall into the trap of thinking that sensory experience would bring them
happiness.
“So when joy arises at the level of your mind and not just your senses,
you can maintain a deep sense of satisfaction for a much longer period of
time—even for twenty-four hours.
“So I always say to people, you have to pay more attention to the
mental level of joy and happiness. Not just physical pleasure, but
satisfaction at the level of mind. This is true joyfulness. When you are
joyful and happy at the mental level, physical pain doesn’t matter very
much. But if there is no joy or happiness at the mental level, too much
worrying, too much fear, then even physical comforts and pleasure will
not soothe your mental discomfort.”
“Many of our readers,

” I said,

“will understand what physical pleasure
is, or the physical dimension of joy and happiness. They know how a
good meal or a good song makes them feel. But what is this mental
happiness or mental pleasure that you’re talking about that lasts for
twenty-four hours?”
“A genuine sense of love and affection,

” the Dalai Lama said.
“Do you wake up with this joy?” I asked. “Even before coffee?”
“If you develop a strong sense of concern for the well-being of all
sentient beings and in particular all human beings, this will make you
happy in the morning, even before coffee.
“This is the value of compassion, of having compassionate feelings

S
for others. Even, you see, ten minutes or thirty minutes of meditating on
compassion, on kindness for others, and you will see its effects all day.
That’s the way to maintain a calm and joyous mind.
“Everyone has had the experience of being in a good mood and some
trouble comes, and you feel okay. When your mood is really bad, even
when your closest friend comes, you still feel unhappy.”
“Did you feel that way when I came?” the Archbishop said, playfully.
“That is exactly why I came to the airport to receive you—so I could
feel more unhappy . . . and make trouble for you!”

• • •

cience has a term for the unsatisfactory nature of pursuing pleasure
alone: the hedonic treadmill, named for the Greek school of thought
that believed pleasure to be the ultimate good. Throughout history,
hedonism has had its advocates, back to the birth of written culture. In the
Gilgamesh tale, Siduri, the female divinity of fermentation (in other
words, alcohol), admonishes,

“Fill your belly. Day and night make merry.
Let days be full of joy. Dance and make music day and night . . . These
things alone are the concern of men.” Even in the deeply spiritual culture
of ancient India, the source of much of the Dalai Lama’s Tibetan
tradition, there was a hedonistic school known as Charvaka. In many
ways, hedonism is the default philosophy of most people and certainly
has become the dominant view of consumer “shop till you drop” culture.
Yet scientists have found that the more we experience any pleasure,
the more we become numb to its effects and take its pleasures for
granted. The first bowl of ice cream is sublime, the second bowl tasty,
and the third causes indigestion. It is like a drug that must be taken in
ever-greater quantities to produce the same high. But there does seem to
be one thing in the literature that powerfully and lastingly changes our
sense of well-being. It is what the Dalai Lama and the Archbishop had
been advocating throughout our first day: our relationships, and
specifically, our expression of love and generosity to others in our life.
Richard Davidson, the neuroscientist with whom I had lunch in San

Francisco, has drawn together the neuroimaging research into a unified
theory of the happy brain. I was so fascinated by what he was saying that
I could not pay attention to my spring rolls, and those spring rolls were
really good, at least on the physical level.
There are four independent brain circuits that influence our lasting
well-being, Davidson explained. The first is “our ability to maintain
positive states.” It makes sense that the ability to maintain positive states
or positive emotions would directly impact one’s ability to experience
happiness. These two great spiritual leaders were saying that the fastest
way to this state is to start with love and compassion.
The second circuit is responsible for “our ability to recover from
negative states.” What was most fascinating to me was that these circuits
were totally independent. One could be good at maintaining positive
states but easily fall into an abyss of a negative state from which one had
a hard time recovering. That explained a lot in my life.
The third circuit, also independent but essential to the others, is “our
ability to focus and avoid mind-wandering.” This of course was the
circuit that so much of meditation exists to develop. Whether it was
focusing on one’s breath, or a mantra, or the analytic meditation that the
Dalai Lama did each morning, this ability to focus one’s attention was
fundamental.
The fourth and final circuit is “our ability to be generous.” That was
amazing to me: that we had an entire brain circuit, one of four, devoted to
generosity. It is no wonder that our brains feel so good when we help
others or are helped by others, or even witness others being helped, which
Ekman had described as the elevation that is one dimension of joy. There
was strong and compelling research that we come factory equipped for
cooperation, compassion, and generosity.
John Bargh, one of the world’s leading experts on the science of the
unconscious, describes it as one of three innate (and often unconscious)
goals: to survive, to reproduce, and to cooperate. In lab experiments
where eighteen-month-old children were shown dolls facing each other,
they were more cooperative than those who were shown dolls who were
facing away from each other. This unconscious prime, which can be

turned on or off, Bargh argues, is one interesting example that
cooperation is a deep evolutionary drive that exists from our earliest
development.
Perhaps more sobering, it has also hardwired us to cooperate with and
be kind to those who look like our caregivers, who presumably kept us
safe. We are more wary of others who look different: these are the
unconscious roots of prejudice. Our empathy does not seem to extend to
those who are outside our “group,

” which is perhaps why the Archbishop
and the Dalai Lama are constantly reminding us that we are, in fact, one
group—humanity. Nonetheless, the ability and desire to cooperate and to
be generous to others is there in our neural circuits, and it can be
harnessed personally, socially, and globally.

I

Our Greatest Joy

addressed the next question to the Archbishop. “The joy that you are
talking about is not just a feeling. It’s not something that just comes and
goes. It’s something much more profound. And it sounds like what you’re
saying is that joy is a way of approaching the world. Many people are
waiting for happiness or joy. When they get a job, when they fall in love,
when they get rich, then they will be happy, then they will have joy. You
are talking about something that is available right now, without waiting
for anything.”
The Archbishop considered his response carefully. “I mean simply to
say that ultimately our greatest joy is when we seek to do good for
others.” Was it really that straightforward? Did we just need to stimulate
and satisfy our dedicated brain circuit of generosity? As if anticipating
my skepticism, the Archbishop continued,

“It’s how we are made. I mean
we’re wired to be compassionate.” Quite literally wired, I thought, based
on Davidson’s research.
“We are wired to be caring for the other and generous to one another.
We shrivel when we are not able to interact. I mean that is part of the
reason why solitary confinement is such a horrendous punishment. We
depend on the other in order for us to be fully who we are. I didn’t know
that I was going to come so soon to the concept that we have at home, the
concept of Ubuntu. It says: A person is a person through other persons.
“Ubuntu says when I have a small piece of bread, it is for my benefit
that I share it with you. Because, after all, none of us came into the world
on our own. We needed two people to bring us into the world. And the
Bible that we Jews and Christians share tells a beautiful story. God says,
‘It is not good for Adam to be alone.’ Well, you could have said,

‘No, I’m
sorry, he’s not alone. I mean, there are trees, there are animals, and there
are the birds. How can you say he’s alone?’
“And you realize that in a very real sense we’re meant for a very

profound complementarity. It is the nature of things. You don’t have to
be a believer in anything. I mean I could not speak as I am speaking
without having learned it from other human beings. I could not walk as a
human being. I could not think as a human being, except through learning
it from other human beings. I learned to be a human being from other
human beings. We belong in this delicate network. It is actually quite
profound.
“Unfortunately, in our world we tend to be blind to our connection
until times of great disaster. We find we start caring about people in
Timbuktu, whom we’ve never met and we’re probably never going to
meet this side of death. And yet we pour out our hearts. We give
resources to help them because we realize that we are bound up together.
We are bound up and can be human only together.”
I was deeply moved by what the Archbishop was saying, yet I could
hear the skepticism that some readers would have, that I had had. Most
people do not walk around thinking about how they can help others.
Whether we like it or not, most people are waking up in the morning
wondering how they are going to manage to do their job, make enough
money to pay the bills, and take care of their families and other
responsibilities. “Nice guys finish last” is a phrase that speaks to our deep
ambivalence about kindness and compassion in the West. Success in our
society is measured by money, power, fame, and influence.
These men had all of these except the first, but neither would go
hungry. For spiritual leaders, ignoring money was fine, but what about for
those who lived and died in the almighty marketplace? Most people are
not aspiring to spiritual greatness or enlightenment but to pay for their
children’s education and make it through retirement without running out
of money. I chuckled at the memory of visiting the house of some friends
outside of Las Vegas. It was a beautiful home, actually more like a
Persian estate, with multiple buildings with fountains and flowing
channels of water. It was reminiscent of the great structures of Islamic
civilization. I was there for a discussion of the Archbishop’s legacy, and
when he arrived and witnessed the beauty and grandeur of the place, he
had smiled and said cheekily,

“I was wrong—I do want to be rich.”

W
“As you just mentioned,

” the Dalai Lama added, getting quite

animated,

“people think about money or fame or power. From the point
of view of one’s own personal happiness, these are shortsighted. The
reality, as the Archbishop mentioned, is that human beings are social
animals. One individual, no matter how powerful, how clever, cannot
survive without other human beings. So the best way to fulfill your
wishes, to reach your goals, is to help others, to make more friends.
“How do we create more friends?” he now asked rhetorically. “Trust.
How do you develop trust? It’s simple: You show your genuine sense of
concern for their well-being. Then trust will come. But if behind an
artificial smile, or a big banquet, is a self-centered attitude deep inside of
you, then there will never be trust. If you are thinking how to exploit, how
to take advantage of them, then you can never develop trust in others.
Without trust, there is no friendship. We human beings are social
animals, as we’ve said, and we need friends. Genuine friends. Friends for
money, friends for power are artificial friends.”
The Archbishop jumped in. “This God is community, fellowship.
Being created by this God, we are created in order to flourish. And we
flourish in community. When we become self-centered, turning in on
ourselves, as sure as anything, we are going to find one day a deep, deep,
deep frustration.”

• • •

e are left with a paradox. If one of the fundamental secrets of joy
is going beyond our own self-centeredness, then is it foolish
selfishness (as the Dalai Lama would say) and self-defeating to focus on
our own joy and happiness? The Archbishop had already said that we
could not pursue joy and happiness in their own right, so is it not a
mistake to focus on them at all?
Research suggests that cultivating your own joy and happiness has
benefits not just for you, but also for others in your life. When we are
able to move beyond our own pain and suffering, we are more available
to others; pain causes us to be extremely self-focused. Whether the pain

is physical or mental, it seems to consume all of our focus and leave very
little attention for others. In his book with the Dalai Lama, psychiatrist
Howard Cutler summarized these findings: “In fact, survey after survey
has shown that it is unhappy people who tend to be most self-focused and
are socially withdrawn, brooding, and even antagonistic. Happy people, in
contrast, are generally found to be more sociable, flexible, and creative,
and are able to tolerate life’s daily frustrations more easily than unhappy
people. And, most important, they are found to be more loving and
forgiving than unhappy people.”
Still some might wonder what our own joy has to do with countering
injustice and inequality. What does our happiness have to do with
addressing the suffering of the world? In short, the more we heal our own
pain, the more we can turn to the pain of others. But in a surprising way,
what the Archbishop and the Dalai Lama were saying is that the way we
heal our own pain is actually by turning to the pain of others. It is a
virtuous cycle. The more we turn toward others, the more joy we
experience, and the more joy we experience, the more we can bring joy to
others. The goal is not just to create joy for ourselves but, as the
Archbishop poetically phrased it,

“to be a reservoir of joy, an oasis of
peace, a pool of serenity that can ripple out to all those around you.” As
we will see, joy is in fact quite contagious. As is love, compassion, and
generosity.
So being more joyful is not just about having more fun. We’re talking
about a more empathic, more empowered, even more spiritual state of
mind that is totally engaged with the world. When the Archbishop and I
were working on creating a training course for peace ambassadors and
activists who go into conflict regions, he explained how peace must come
from within. We cannot bring peace if we do not have inner peace.
Similarly, we cannot hope to make the world a better, happier place if we
do not also aspire for this in our own lives. I was eager to hear about how
we deal with the inevitable obstacles to joy, but I knew that would need to
wait for the next day. There was time for only one brief question before
lunch.
I asked the Dalai Lama what it was like to wake up with joy, and he

shared his experience each morning. “I think if you are an intensely
religious believer, as soon as you wake up, you thank God for another
day. And you try to do God’s will. For a nontheist like myself, but who is
a Buddhist, as soon as I wake up, I remember Buddha’s teaching: the
importance of kindness and compassion, wishing something good for
others, or at least to reduce their suffering. Then I remember that
everything is interrelated, the teaching of interdependence. So then I set
my intention for the day: that this day should be meaningful. Meaningful
means, if possible, serve and help others. If not possible, then at least not
to harm others. That’s a meaningful day.”
he Dalai Lama’s audience room had been transformed into a dining
room. At the far end was an ornate golden Buddha encased in a
colorful wooden box. The walls were hung with thangkas, brightly
painted silk scrolls that depicted images of the Buddha and other
Buddhist figures. They were traditionally hung on the walls of
monasteries for brief periods of time to inspire meditative practice. They
were used to encourage practitioners along the path of enlightenment.
The windows were covered with white lace curtains and the table was
set for lunch with baskets of Tibetan flat bread and boxed juice
containers. The whole setting was simple, almost like a picnic, and the
meal was typical Tibetan food from the Dalai Lama’s kitchen. There were
noodles and vegetables and momos, the famed Tibetan steamed
dumplings.
The Dalai Lama and Archbishop Tutu sat across from each other. As I
sat next to the Dalai Lama I could feel in his posture and his body
language the power of a leader. I remembered how strongly and tenderly
he had held my hand the first time we met. His kindness did not in any
way diminish his power, a valuable reminder that compassion is a feature
of strength, not weakness, a point they would make throughout our
conversations.
When the Dalai Lama greets you, he takes your hand and then rubs it
tenderly, as a grandparent might. He looks into your eyes, feels deeply
what you are feeling, and touches his forehead to yours. Whatever
feeling, elation or anguish, is in your heart and reflected on your face, it
is mirrored in his. But then when he meets the next person, those
emotions are gone and he is wholly available for the next encounter and
the next moment. Perhaps that is what it means to be fully present,

available for each moment and each person we encounter, untethered by
the ruminating memories of the past and not lured by the anticipatory
worry about the future.
The lunch began by returning to the theme of birthdays, aging, and
mortality.
“I went to see a German specialist for knees,

” the Dalai Lama said.
“He found my physical condition very good. And then he told me my
knees were the problem. He said you are not eighteen years old but eighty
years old, so nothing much can be done. I really felt that was a great
teaching. It is very important to think about impermanence. He reminds
me I’m eighty years old. That’s wonderful. But, my friend, you are even
older than me.”
“Are you showing off?” the Archbishop said.
“My own kitchen made this,

” the Dalai Lama said as he offered a

piece of bread to his honored guest.
“You put your fingers on the bread and think I should eat it?”
Archbishop responded. “I like this one,

” Archbishop Tutu said, passing
over the multigrain for the white bread, glancing over at his American
doctor with a smile.
“The media at the airport said,

‘You must be very happy to have

Archbishop Tutu visiting,

’” the Dalai Lama said. “I told them,
‘Yes,
indeed, I am very happy. I am receiving one of my very good friends.
Firstly, on the human level, he is a very good human being. Secondly, he
is a religious leader, a serious practitioner who respects different
religious traditions. Then thirdly, and most importantly, he is my very,
very close friend.’”
“You are just flattering me.”
“So then I told them that you often used to describe me as a
mischievous person and so I said I also consider you a mischievous
person. The meeting of two mischievous people is wonderful. So, very
happy reunion.” They both laughed.
Now the Archbishop crossed himself and said a prayer before eating
his bread.
“Is it okay? Temperature is okay?” the Dalai Lama asked. It did not

T
matter that he was a great spiritual leader, the former head of the Tibetan
nation, and the reincarnation of the Bodhisattva of Compassion to the
devout; at this moment, he was the host, and he was concerned with
whether his guests were happy with the meal.
“Thank you very much,

” the Archbishop said. “Thank you for

welcoming us and thank you for the lunch and thank you for putting all
those people along the road to welcome us.” He laughed. “The soup is
delicious.”
I have never seen Archbishop Tutu miss an opportunity to thank
someone or appreciate what he has been given. He will often stop an
entire production or an event to acknowledge all that are present.
“This soup is beautiful,

” the Archbishop said, fending off the monks
who were trying to serve him more food. Everyone else was almost
through with their meals, and he was still sipping his soup. “It’s lovely.
Please, please, this is all I’m going to have. I’m going later on to the
dessert—I mean—the fruit salad.” Then seeing that ice cream was now
being offered, he laughed. “Yes, okay, maybe a little ice cream.” He was
swaying his head from side to side, balancing his health on the one side
and his sweet tooth on the other. The Archbishop is a big fan of ice
cream, especially rum raisin, and when he stayed with Rachel and me, his
office kindly told us his food preferences: chicken instead of fish, rum
and Coke—now given up for those pesky health reasons—and rum raisin
ice cream. Rum raisin ice cream was not an easy flavor to find outside of
the holidays, but we finally found a gallon container in the deep freezer
of an ice cream warehouse. The Archbishop had three well-enjoyed bites
for one dessert, and we ate the rest of the gallon for months.

• • •

he conversation transitioned to the topics of bringing together their
two religious traditions, the great challenge of religious conflict, and
the need for tolerance. The Dalai Lama began by saying it’s not possible
for everyone to be a Christian or a Buddhist. “There’s no other choice but
for followers of the world’s religions to accept the reality of other faiths.

We have to live together. In order to live happily, we must respect each
other’s traditions. I really admire other traditions.”
“Kofi Annan, when he was in his last year, set up a commission,
” the

Archbishop added. “They called it the High Level Panel, a rather
pompous title. We were from all traditions, and despite our diversity, we
produced a unanimous report. We concluded,

‘There is nothing wrong

with faiths. The problem is the faithful.’”
“That’s true, that’s true,

” the Dalai Lama agreed.

I asked what we must do about intolerance and fanaticism, which was
flaring all around the world.
“Education and wider contact are really the only solutions,

” the Dalai
Lama replied. “I have gone to make pilgrimages to holy sites all over the
world—such as Fátima in Portugal, the Wailing Wall and Dome of the
Rock in Jerusalem. One time I was in Barcelona, Spain, and I met a
Christian monk who had spent five years in the mountains living as a
hermit—with very few hot meals. I asked him what his practice was, and
he said the practice of love. When he answered, there was something very
special in his eyes. This is really the practice at the core of all the world’s
religions—love. I didn’t think to myself when I met this holy man:
‘Unfortunately he’s not a Buddhist,

’ or ‘It’s too bad he’s a Christian.’”

“I often say to people,

‘Do you really think that . . .’” the Archbishop
began. But the Dalai Lama had turned to one of the monks who was
serving food. The Archbishop pretended to scold him: “Are you
listening?”
The Dalai Lama, who had missed the Archbishop’s comment,
launched in with,

“So, that shows, really . . .”

The Archbishop continued to pretend that he was offended. “You see?
He’s not listening.”
“Unless you use the stick, I will not listen,

” the Dalai Lama said,

laughing.
“But I thought you were nonviolent!”
“Now, please, you speak more. I should concentrate on eating. This is
my last meal of the day.” In the Buddhist monastic tradition, the Dalai
Lama eats only two meals a day, breakfast and lunch.

“Okay. As I was saying, do you really think that when—I didn’t say if;
I said when—the Dalai Lama arrives in heaven, that God will say,
‘Oh,
Dalai Lama, you’ve been so wonderful. What a pity you are not a
Christian. You’ll have to go to the warmer place.’ Everybody sees just
how entirely ridiculous it is.” The Archbishop paused and then, in a very
intimate moment of friendship said,

“I think one of the best things that

ever happened to me was meeting you.”
The Dalai Lama smiled and then started to tell another story.
“I thought you were going to try to eat!” the Archbishop said.
The Dalai Lama chortled and went back to his dessert.
“Yes, but you have been a wonderful influence in the world,
” the
Archbishop continued. “There are many, many people that you have
helped to become good people, and people of different religions, people
of different faiths. They can see, they can sense—because I don’t think it
is what you say, although, yes, what you say is okay . . . sort of
acceptable. Scientists also think you are clever, but it is really who you
are. I think everywhere in the world you go, people are aware that you are
authentic. You’re not putting it on. You live what you teach, and you have
helped very, very, very many people recover a belief in their faiths, a
belief also in goodness. You are popular not just with old people but also
with young people. I’ve said that you and Nelson Mandela are the only
people that I can think of who are not pop stars and who could fill Central
Park as you do. I mean when people know that you are going to come and
speak, they come in droves. So the thing we say, about our world being a
secular world and all of that, is only partly true.”
The Dalai Lama waved his hands, dismissing his rank or specialness.
“I always consider myself personally one of the seven billion human
beings. Nothing special. So, on that level, I have tried to make people
aware that the ultimate source of happiness is simply a healthy body and
a warm heart.”
As he spoke, I wondered, why this is so difficult for us to believe and
to act on? It should be obvious that we are the same, but often we feel
separate. There is so much isolation and alienation. Certainly I had grown
up feeling this way in New York City, which at the time was the most

populated place in the world.
“Everybody wants a happy life—and our individual happy life
depends on a happy humanity. So we have to think about humanity,
discover a sense of oneness of all seven billion human beings.
“Tea or coffee?” the Dalai Lama said, once again returning from the
spiritual teacher to the host.
“I’ve got juice, thank you,

” the Archbishop replied. “You were raised

with a very special status in Tibet. You must have come to this
recognition of oneness over time.”
“Yes, I have grown in my wisdom from study and experience. When I
first went to Peking, now Beijing, to meet Chinese leaders, and also in
1956 when I came to India and met some Indian leaders, there was too
much formality, so I felt nervous. So now, when I meet people, I do it on
a human-to-human level, no need for formality. I really hate formality.
When we are born, there is no formality. When we die, there is no
formality. When we enter hospital, there is no formality. So formality is
just artificial. It just creates additional barriers. So irrespective of our
beliefs, we are all the same human beings. We all want a happy life.” I
couldn’t help wondering if the Dalai Lama’s dislike of formality had to
do with having spent his childhood in a gilded cage.
“Was it only when you went into exile,

” I asked,

“that the formality

ended?”
“Yes, that’s right. So sometimes I say, Since I became a refugee, I
have been liberated from the prison of formality. So I became much
closer to reality. That’s much better. I often tease my Japanese friends
that there is too much formality in their cultural etiquette. Sometimes
when we discuss something, they always respond like this.” The Dalai
Lama vigorously nodded his head. “So whether they agree or disagree, I
cannot tell. The worst thing is the formal lunches. I always tease them
that the meal looks like decoration, not like food. Everything is very
beautiful, but very small portions! I don’t care about formality, so I ask
them, more rice, more rice. Too much formality, then you are left with a
very little portion, which is maybe good for a bird.” He was scooping up
the last bits of dessert.

“Everybody may want to be happy,

” I offered,

“but the challenge is a
lot of people don’t know how. You were talking about the importance of
being warmhearted, but a lot of people are shy or have a hard time
opening up to other people. They get scared. They’re afraid of rejection.
You’ve spoken about when you approach people with trust, then it
inspires trust in them as well.”
“That’s right. Genuine friendship is entirely based on trust,

” the Dalai
Lama explained. “If you really feel a sense of concern for the well-being
of others, then trust will come. That’s the basis of friendship. We are
social animals. We need friends. I think, from the time of our birth till
our death, friends are very important.
“Scientists have found that we need love to survive. Our mothers show
tremendous love and affection to us when we are born. Many scientists
say that after birth, there are a number of weeks when the mother’s
physical touch is the key factor to developing the brain properly. After
birth, if the child is isolated without the mother or physical touch, it can
be very harmful. This is nothing to do with religion. This is biology. We
need love.”
The Dalai Lama had first heard about this research in the 1980s from
the late biologist Robert Livingston, who later became his biology
“tutor.” Child neurologist and neuroscientist Tallie Baram has conducted
one of the more recent examples of this important field of research. She
found that a mother’s caress triggers activity that improves cognition and
resilience to stress in a baby’s developing brain. The mother’s touch
could literally prevent the release of stress hormones that have been
shown to lead to the disintegration of dendritic spines, branchlike
structures on the neurons that are important to the sending and receiving
of messages and the encoding of memory.
“My mother was a twin,

” I said. “And she was born prematurely, at
just two and half pounds, and she was in an incubator for two months
without any human touch.”
“Did it affect her?” Archbishop Tutu asked.